He was a mighty man.
He felled the heroes of the enemy.
He slayed a giant.
He even killed a lion.
And his name was not David.
Who was he?
Open your Bibles with me, please,
to the book of 1 Chronicles chapter 11
—1 Chronicles 11:22:
“Benaiah the son of Jehoiada
“was a courageous man who performed
“many exploits in Kabzeel.
“He struck down
the two sons of Ariel of Moab,
“and he descended into a waterpit
on a snowy day and killed a lion.
“He also struck down an Egyptian man
of extraordinary size
“—five cubits tall.
“Though the Egyptian had a spear in his hand
“like the beam of loom workers,
“he went against him with a rod
“and snatched the spear away
from the Egyptian’s hand
and killed him with his own spear.”
He is Benaiah.
Look at all we learn about him
in these verses,
the qualities that Benaiah displayed.
It tells us in verse 22
that he “was a courageous man.”
He “performed many exploits in Kabzeel.”
Kabzeel—Kabzeel is a small place
on the very southern border of Judah.
It borders Edom in the middle of nowhere.
But Benaiah worked there.
He was happy to be there.
It may be that that was his home.
Or it may be that that was his assignment.
No matter,
as obscure a place as Kabzeel is,
that’s where he worked.
And the record says that he performed
many exploits courageously in Kabzeel.
He killed a lion—courage.
But do you notice
that “he descended into a waterpit . . .
and killed a lion”?
Courage.
He descended into a waterpit
with a lion.
There’s only one coming out,
and it was Benaiah.
“He descended into a waterpit
on a snowy day.”
He didn’t wait for the sun to shine.
He knew that was the day
—adverse conditions, no matter.
Benaiah went in, and he slayed the lion.
Look at verse 23,
some more amazing qualities.
He struck down the giant,
‘an Egyptian of extraordinary size.’
But notice this: “Though the Egyptian
had a spear in his hand
“like the beam of loom workers,
he [Benaiah]
went against him with a rod”—a rod, a stick.
He didn’t have the right equipment
—courage, adaptability, commitment.
And notice this.
What does he do?
It says: “He went against him with a rod
and snatched the spear away
from the Egyptian’s hand
and killed him with his own spear.”
Courage, commitment,
adaptability, resourcefulness
—these are admirable, beneficial qualities.
Are those the qualities
that distinguished Benaiah?
Not entirely.
There was one quality that exceeded these,
and that quality was loyalty
—tenacious adherence
to the person of Jehovah.
That’s what the Bible record reveals
about Benaiah:
personal loyalty to Jehovah.
There is a caution, though, with loyalty.
The demarcation
between loyalty to Jehovah
and loyalty to self
can often be blurry.
It hides under the inertia
of imperfection and selfishness.
That line of loyalty to Jehovah
versus loyalty to self
can become very difficult to see.
In fact, loyalty to self
can lie dormant within us
until the circumstances arise and change,
and then it can emerge.
And Benaiah and his contemporaries
provide for us a beautiful contrast
in loyalty to Jehovah and loyalty to self.
Think of Benaiah.
He lived in a very tumultuous time.
David was a fugitive with his mighty men.
One of them likely was Benaiah, among others.
These men were comrades in arms
running with David.
They were a band of brothers.
They were fiercely loyal to David
and, to be sure,
they were loyal to Jehovah as well.
For example, among these three mighty men
were three brothers, fleshly brothers.
They’re mentioned in verses 20 and 26:
Joab, Abishai, and Asahel.
Now consider when circumstances changed
for the mighty men,
when Saul died and David now became king,
in these changing circumstances,
what happened to the mighty men?
Here’s the contrast: Joab and Benaiah.
What happened to Joab?
Joab saw opportunity
in changing circumstances,
and his loyalty to Jehovah was eclipsed
by his loyalty to himself.
For instance,
it was Joab who took matters
into his own hands,
and he killed Abner
with whom David
had already concluded a covenant.
He took matters into his own hands.
Why?
He wanted Abner’s job.
His selfish ambitions got the better of him,
and they eclipsed his loyalty to Jehovah.
Joab was a courageous man.
He was resourceful.
He was adaptable.
Admirable qualities.
But in the absence
of deep personal loyalty to Jehovah,
they seem somehow tainted, don’t they?
But consider Benaiah
in the same circumstances.
Benaiah had no part in these kind
of intrigues like Joab and his brothers.
Benaiah was loyal to Jehovah,
and he was a loyal man
to Jehovah’s anointed one, David.
And look at what we find in verses 24 and 25,
verses 24 and 25: “These things
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada did,
“and he had a reputation
like that of the three mighty warriors.
“Although he was distinguished
even more than the thirty,
“he did not attain to the rank of the three.
However, David appointed him
over his own bodyguard.”
You see, in the same circumstances as Joab,
Benaiah’s tenacious adherence to Jehovah
—his deep personal loyalty to Jehovah—
safeguarded him in these circumstances.
What did David see in Benaiah?
David saw in Benaiah
what he himself exemplified,
and that was deep and strong personal loyalty
to Jehovah.
You can see that in this verse,
in verse 25, can’t you?
It says: “However, David appointed him
over his own bodyguard.”
David knew that to assign someone
to this very, very trusted position
(head of his own bodyguard),
the man in that position,
if he was loyal to Jehovah,
would be loyal to him.
And that’s what David saw in Benaiah.
Then came another time of change
decades later.
When David died and Solomon became king
—changed circumstances,
another time of opportunity—
how would Benaiah react?
The same way he always did:
deep personal loyalty to Jehovah.
And it was Solomon when he became king
who rewarded Benaiah.
The son of David, Solomon,
Jehovah’s anointed,
rewarded Benaiah for his loyalty.
Turn with me, please, to Proverbs 19:22.
You see, Solomon
knew something about loyalty.
He was the son of David.
And look at what he wrote about loyalty
at Proverbs 19:22.
Solomon said: “The desirable thing in a man
is his loyal love.”
His loyalty
—that’s what Jehovah looks for in us.
So Benaiah was indeed a mighty man,
and he had beautiful qualities.
Did they distinguish him?
Not entirely.
It was his deep personal loyalty to Jehovah
first and foremost that distinguished him.
And because of that deep personal loyalty
to Jehovah,
those qualities of Benaiah were beautiful.
So daily cultivate your loyalty to God
through prayer and study.
That’s been your training here.
Use your training to develop
your close personal loyalty to Jehovah.
That’s what Benaiah did.
Think of Benaiah’s training.
He was the son of Jehoiada.
Jehoiada was
one of the chief Levitical priests in Israel.
Benaiah was raised with scrolls,
not with swords.
Growing up as the son of a priest,
that was his training.
So like Benaiah,
be willing to do the work without the rank.
Remember, loyalty is tested
not when you are at ease.
Loyalty is tested under adversity.
So be careful in changing circumstances.
Guard your hearts.
Dear students,
you all have beautiful qualities.
We’ve seen them over the last five months.
But may loyalty,
may your deep personal loyalty to Jehovah,
distinguish you.